What should I stream the day because I'm putting them on and off all the time because I
can't read without them. But if I have them on when I'm not reading
yeah, sorry respirator Chris,
don't worry.
Thank you, Chris.
What the time is used to speak to your
suppression. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker fellow members and standing orders community and
fellow submitters. And those are following
along at home Syria intense
within my time just to give a brief explanation of
the points that I'm making and I should emphasize.
These are made in my own name including that
the recommendations and relations to the remit of
the regulations Review Committee not standing girls. I mean but
indeed the cheer at that time again made in my name rather than any capacity
relating to that body. I thought
maybe within this discussion period I could briefly outline
what I've summarized as
two in three Indian go to one and
one is not the summer lie
to Traditions made by the party. So I thought you know
that could you know leading into discussions that the committee is ongoing basis,
but it's publication are great for the chance
at least outline it briefly.
And so if I can turn into items two and three so
the remit of the regulations Review Committee to include an ability
to consider whether the lack of a regulation within a
regulatory regime as distinct from a particular regulation
that has been made and that that
should be able to be considered as offending the
grounds at standing order 327. So for
context and the regulations would be committee has the
ability to consider complaints made by members of the public about
particular regulations, but it
can't consider a complaint at least on a
narrow reading of the standing order and their regulation
hasn't been made that should have been made with a because the legislation
requires it will because
Because this you know Gap and the regulatory regime so
it would be a more holistic way of looking at the regime
in the interaction of the regulations that I made as a part,
you know, as opposed to at the moment and my submission
the case whereby you can only consider regulation
has been made it rather than the absence of
one. So I'll just pause for breath in if there's no reaction. Just
a question. Yeah, this is something that
the committee had.
I had bought really attention and weren't able to oh if
it's helpful to ask and not in
so many words, but we found ourselves considering a number
of complaints in which it seemed to me the the
defect and in the the reasonable complaint
was that a regulation should have been made to
cover a certain situation and it seemed
to me that that was you know a constraint on our ability
to do what I think the parliament would want the regulations Review
Committee to do which is to consider with a you know,
people's lives are effective in the way that's contemplated by the primary legislation
not withstanding that defeat.
so item 2 then also in relation to
the regulations Review Committee and
this actually also
arises from a couple of complaints that
we heard whereby a regulation had been made. That's
was.
That we're actually in both cases funny enough. I should
be careful because I think one of them at least is it my last
checking them with the committee was still alive before it but in rough
teams and situation is when we're
a regulations be made restricting the activities of people
who are deemed to be competent to carry out a
student activity of a medical nature. And the question
is whether the regulations reasonable at the time
that the regulation was made with enough people in
the country capable of fulfilling their function that was
a reasonable regulation and my view, you know for the sake of arguments. So
that's the case later on it becomes unreasonable and
my view because we have fewer of such competent
practitioners available. So we draw the
line in terms of people who are able to
carry out that function. I believe the line is shifted as a result
of circumstances view by making the regulation unreasonable.
and at the time of the complaint was made not the standing
as I say that in my view, the regulation could have been
reasonable in time it was made and I'm trying
not to be more specifically and so
through you Mr. Chair invite you into.
And it's just around that so if somebody
can planes as the has happened, is there
the ability for the committee to then?
Make a determination a recommendation and
around age or that's a good
question. I I think that the wording anticipates this
regulation is reasonable, you
know offends the standing what is grounds or
doesn't at the time that it was made.
And in the case of animal welfare,
and I'm now getting bit more specific but it's probably
helpful to give these sample and the aim of the animal welfare
actors to ensure your animal welfare and
that and that was served at the time. The regulation was
made and indeed the Act was made by saying the only people with
student qualifications can do a certain procedure on certain animals,
but now that there are a few of those available and
it's actually to the detriment of
Animal Welfare to have such a regulation. Yeah, and then, you know
regulatory review teams. That's now inconsistent with
games that legislation because Animal Welfare is better served
by the procedure being able to be performed by someone
who's maybe about this qualified, but it's not just you I
with you know one who's
not qualified at all.
Okay, so recently came stuff Mr.
Chair, but I'm grateful
for the opportunity to put it to the committee. And if there's
no further reaction on those then turn to the
probably the more interesting one, which is in relation to permanent
membership of select committees. I
agree with the problem definition by for
example, the X party is outlined and Mr. Seymour's
Submachine East today and by others
that it's you know,
it's inherent conflict of interest between members of our select
committee who are members of the same political party
is ministers, but any of the list, I mean, there's a parliament who
should be scrutinizing of in yeah, I
don't suppose this is you phenomenon so happens
that I've only been Member of Parliament during the time
my party's been opposition, but make it that what you will but it
seems to me recently well agreed that
this is at least potentially problem. My proposed
solution. However is not to have what
Would effectively be almost invariably a
majority of opposition members but to say that
each committee should be evenly split between government and opposition
because that way we avoid the difficulty that
was identified by a couple of members of the committee yesterday. I think
honorable Michael Woodhouse among them that and
actually Dr. Duncan Webb, too. That's if we
were to go, you know, too far in the direction that was being proposed that
a government would have
its agenda, you know completely derailed or
be it to the be acknowledging that at the committee
the whole house stage a frivolous or
at least
Inconsistent Amendment that'll
be made at select committee, you know would need to be reversed in
that seems to me a waste of time and also inconsistent with the idea that a
government wins, you know is government precise because
of one energy an election. They have the opportunity to put
forward early to serve agenda accordingly. Good question.
Thank you. I find
this all quite interesting because you're right in
some ways. It's similar to what the experience put out and saying
that we need more opposition States and more
engagement and Slick many process. I guess
my question is around the
50 50 split and whether or
not it would actually work in practice and I'll give you an example is
when we were working on end of
life choice that committee had eight members and it
became evenly divided into 50/50 of
those for it and those against it and instead
of members of the committee.
Forming a consensus where they should work together on genuine
change they decided the bill should not progress at
all and didn't put forward any recommendations. Yeah.
And so I wonder given that that can happen
in a conscience area could that happen when you have government
this is opposition where it just becomes 50/50 don't
agree. Yeah. I think you're right to make
the distinction between conscience versus government business
or non-conscience matters because I
think that was a particular example, whereby the committee did
have difficulty and ultimately resolve that it wouldn't recommend one
way or the other so it doesn't really mean that the bill not pass but
also did not recommend that the bill passed at my
own issues quickly but having been a member of that
Justice Silicon Valley for that three year period there was
a student amount it was, you know,
being honest here that more than just the potential for
good luck and I see the Clack a bit committee nodding
with some expression
on his face, which I won't divulge.
It was difficult at times and there
were there was a need for negotiation and good
faith behavior in order to make it work. And I don't think that's very
far different from the case of what the ACT
party and others have proposed. Whereby, you know
good faith engagement in Behavior would be needed for
you know that full, you know,
that that proposal to work as well. I think that it would
be possible for the New Zealand Public to gauge the
behavior of parties. It's like committee whether it's a split or
you know, opposition dominated in judge accordingly.
So I may be being more optimistic than the
experience on the Justice silicone. The last
Parliament would indicate that I should be but neither is I'm hopeful we're not
I think that's with respect a more balanced approach
in terms of the respective obligations of
the opposition discretion is on the
one hand and the government's and right or responsibility to
together on the other.
Damn, I'm just wondering how what thought
you've given to the dynamic.
that is in this term where we in climate
change and family and domestic violence and housing and
some
environment there is
members on committees would an effect be
back bench MP's even though I hear from a ministers
that that's not how it feels like they're sitting in front of us
sure. And but otherwise we are position
MPS. So how would that
work in your yeah, I think a very good question.
If I may say I was Keen to get
an answer along similar lines yesterday and questioning
the submitters who made I think it was Mr. Farah
at that point was making again the equivalent and proposal
to that of the ACT party. I think the dividing
line and what I've suggested my submission, is that a government member
by definition is one who as a
member of how do his cabinet ministers as opposed
to ministers outside cabinet because in my my rationale apart
from the fact that we need to draw the line somewhere in those complex
and an Indian environment is this
full cabinet responsibility Collective responsibility
has helped by Kevin ministers as a person Minister outside
cabinet and I
in the case of the green party in its ministers and the current government you
could have a further Nuance, whereby
for student pieces of legislation or the
purpose of student committees, you know within the
that would you know relate to the climate change
and homelessness space and so on that you could actually say for those
purposes the cream parties member of the government opposition, but that would
be I don't know that's a level of detail. I haven't given much
Equation, if you have a major understanding orders
tide vote is lost right?
Might you be open should the
committee consider whether the chair would
then have a casting vote and in
cheers would have I
think a burden of responsibility to act?
in the interest of power
and sometimes they'll be an oppositional impedance. Sometimes the government
and might that actually get around
the perceived deadlock that I that a 50/50
committee by have particularly in.
Contribution on conscience bills is
I think a casting vote
mechanism would be helpful I guess but the counter argument would be of
course that effectively you then be giving a majority to the government
in every case. So not necessarily
that's I guess we we have the power
to determine how government sorry how cheers are
silly finally did. Oh sure and
I suppose that the pride point is she's just got rightly point out that premium
would go on the appointments or the
selection. Excuse me. I'm just here just yeah now
I don't disagree. I had thought about it as well, but wouldn't
that make it quite difficult when?
You know potentially 50% of
the committee then are completely opposed to
what the chair is has done or wanting to
do but you can't then get rid of the chair
or say that you don't have faith in the chair because you're going to have
a book so that as well and so it always be at
odds of the cheer something which interesting about.
Yeah. I don't use a dividing line between procedural
activities versus the awesomest.
Otherwise I've legislation. I mean
again, it's getting quite complicated which is possibly a sign. I'm going down the wrong
path. I'm not sure. Yeah one
more than one more
question. So with this idea of
the recommendation three that you'd
be able to have the regulation Review Committee look
at
relations after effect. Do you
envisage that being similar to the powers that
select committees have to hold inquiries into matters that
they that they wish to
Well, I suppose it would be in the sense that it's important of
the remed of a of us select committee.
I'm not quite sure what you meet. If there was a particular Point
beyond that I've messed up. We were hearing from some submitters that
they wanted select committees to
have the ability to inquire into their own matters of Interest
right beyond the legislation that
usually happens day today. Yeah.
My understanding was that the slick but he's already had that power. It's just they
don't use. Yeah, that's right or regulations review. I'm assuming
that's much more different and it's more tight.
Yeah, that's right. It's pretty constrained very much.
I think there's a bigger question which we've already discussed at least briefly as
a committee and switch we might get back to and
I don't take more of the cheers time than happy with now,
but I think that's part of the bigger discussion obviously committee
and tombs, excuse me this committee about how select committees are
able to act more autonomously from government in the least
way. So for us with personality supporting,
Thank you very much.
Our next submitter is Graham
eachland.
during
cats Dakota Graham welcome. Thank you
for your submission you
and
the members of the committee have rid
your submission and happy to
hear from you and ask questions. Thank
you. I thought I would start with a part of my submission. I
didn't write very much on which was sort of the pat which
has been sort of exercising the committee ever. It's last three hearings that
the question of sort of oversight and things like that and
the first hearing it was noted. It really is
largely is a matter of
You know practice and you know sort of
culture of parliament about how much oversight is
done and and things like that and sort of so it's questionable
what's standing orders changes would help with that the suggestions
around things like splits and committees or things like that and
you know, whether you know, the opposition should have majority some
committees and I suspect there is sort of it's there's a bit
of a distinction or a contradiction between the
aims of slick committees and government oversight
versus the aims and legislative oversight. And
so it's one of the thing, you know, if you would give the
opposition majority so that government oversight over
side of departments can get better.
You're potentially making oversight of legislation
harder you and you know to part
of it is, you know, you have several Alternatives
if I suspect, you know, it's it's
a long way to go, you know to full up position. You
know, there are that's the question what happens, you know, it's what
one thought I had was you have
a position majority but final votes
on reports to the house.
You cast proxy votes just like you do in the house. So, you know
committee members can vote to conduct and inquiry
or convert to or would like to write a
letter this person and envite them to give evidence to us. But you
know, when you're making a recommendation on on a
bill or perhaps even a recommendation from an inquiry, it's well, we've
got 40 MPS and they've got 50 MPS so
they get more of a say on the final recommendations. I'm
not sure that's necessarily the right approach. But if you're looking at
Alternatives which sort of fall short of that the Fuller
proposers that have been suggested by groups like
the green card in the ACT party that is one
option. Another option I think is just
Look at the types of committees you have it's that
if what you really want is greater government
oversight, but without affecting legislative website have an
oversight committee. And that's the one committee which the
opposition is guaranteed a majority on and a senior
member of the opposition cheers it and so the other
ones who can be conducting inquiries and wider things
and maybe they never almost never get legislation. And
so it's the when you're looking at what types of things you
want slick meetings to do realize that you have Alternatives and
Slick many structure or what the roles
that particular slick committees play as a way
of well, this is something we want have a committee which
does that which doesn't necessarily you muck
up your Justice legislation, which is you know, four four,
you know on a five or six different bills to come before
it in the last two and so Alternatives like
that are something that if you're considering how should we
go here? What should we do? It's I think those are
probably
of approaches another common matter that
came up in the first hearing was well, we only have so much time.
And that's a perhaps a
large reason why the culture of not creating new inquiries
or seeking at least new briefings doesn't happen. And
and I don't think it's all of
it. You know, we've got 120 MPS, you know, the United Kingdom's got
1300 when you can't both of
their houses, if you look at Australia, you know, they've really
got you know, I'm not sure if 700 or something. Yeah, someone and
New Zealand wants to conduct at it an inquiry
into South Auckland legislation. It's going to the New Zealand Parliament
someone and Australia wants to conduct inquiry into
South Melbourne legislation is going to be the Victorian Parliament. So
they have you know, the House of
Representative is 150 and I've got a senate as well but they've got
you know a large large number of other MPS who also do all the work
all of which is only done in this place and so
but a couple of Alternatives and it won't
be most bills one thought I had it might be
said peps an idea. I had you know bills that have come from worthy bills
that have come from the law commission, you know, is that you use silicon.
Subcommittees to hear when you've got a lot
of submissions, you know, we need to split the two or three subcommitters to give everyone their
safe. If this is a bill for a law commission, you know,
I don't know much about trust's law but the trusts act or
something like that. It's like actually let's just have two or
three MPS, you know one from this side one from that side make maybe
another they're gonna hear all the evidence and
the rest of the MPS. It's already been through a process at
the law commission to sort of get out the the detail
of it and it's important that Parliament. Does it set aside
the committee as a whole maybe gets the initial briefing but no, we're
gonna slip committee a subcommittee to
do actually all of the work or the principal work
on this bill so that we have more time perhaps to do another
completely unrelated Bill perhaps to do an inquiry. And so
those are sorts of Alternatives of how do
you get more time? And it was having watched the earlier hearings
was thought I had I possibly
some ways there is
always the ability for other MPS to sit in on
Committee, too. Yes, so if somebody had
a particular interest in that law, yes, yes,
certainly a piece of legislation and sort of
the interestingly. I mean, I I was a really good point and
I have been on select committees back on my past life as an
opposition in V where we did split up into subcommittees for
the purposes of very large volumes of submissions. Probably the
biggest challenge to create sexually for the office the class. Well, I
mean anything else because the subcommittee still were often requires
the same level of resourcing as an actual Community, right? And so
you might split into three subcommittees that means three times it was
required to support it. Yes, so but I think
it is a it is a way of getting more efficient use of the members time.
Yes. Oh, I would say when there's disagreement on
a bill in particularly. If only one party is opposing it
then that means that actually the interrogation
of the issue this and not able
to be spread across this admissions. Absolutely and I
think it's not most bills but it will be something, you
know, trust Bill Kristen license sort
of
electric type interviews with people gave the app is
if the evidence that we said, you know, I think I can't remember
which labor chair of the committee was.
So we need to get the grip service. We're going
to make a subcommittee of you and someone from the labor party
you're going to be the ones who actually get to grips with this and that type
of thing. It's not probably a standing order strange
because I suspect you can do it already but use of
subcommittees for bills rather than subcommittees for evidence is
one possibility specialist committees for
legislation are a feature
of Australian most standing committees
in the house for Representatives. We just don't considerly
legislation. They do inquiries and
other things seems to see
nice. It's the same and the House of Commons as well
in a sense that they often appoint ad hoc committee's
for bills. This comes back
to the challenge of the small legislature in on the government side.
You're most experienced.
Are in peace with knowledge of parliamentary practice
and processes typically won't be involved in the Parliamentary process
as much because they'll be ministers on the opposition side.
You'll have more experienced people of the government side, but who are
newer and yes at least experience will be very suspicious of
him. And so it's well I
can tell you certainly The Way We Were the opposition
and so
There's that tension there. Absolutely and it's a
smallly just such a problem right bigger the legislature the at
least you have better. There are people in the UK power and
who have been there 20 or 30 years. I've never been ministers but have been become very
accomplished by our Interiors. Yes as something
and I don't think it's it's not something you're going to fix in this
inquiry. But yeah, it is it is certainly
something that arises with the size of Parliament and potentially also
the size of the executive that's probably my bit about
what the other things people have said and I go
and do a couple I it's a lot of submissions. I've
raised some hopefully sort of
it's obvious you might agree or you might disagree. I'm happy
to take questions on any of it peps, even
on any of other people once and so from
me but I focus perhaps
on two or three of the specific ones the one
I spent the most time perhaps on being the election of
the speaker and it's a question that was
asked of free Palma when he
Same submission in his first one. What about Deputy speaker?
And so I went away and looked at Australia most of
the Deputy speakers or Deputy
presidents usually called shares of
committees. And most of the Australian houses that are
the speaker is elected or the president.
The Senate is elected by secret ballot than usually the deputy
is as well, but not always what we would call the assistance speakers.
And you know, you could sing it in the federal house. It's all
all of the provided presiding officers, but not a
lot of the state houses. It's you know, we appoint a panel of you know,
five assistance speakers, we would call them and they
just seems to be an appointment. So it's announced to a question.
I think there are some benefits to it in the way that
I've written in my submission and I could certainly see it. I think I was
somewhat surprised when I found out how many columns actually
use this process. So first suggested it now, I think a standing
what is submission nine years ago. I think probably after
the UK Parliament had its recent election of a bicycle
below that seems like a good idea but it seems
like a new idea and I think it was at the time but a
lot of parliaments do you work do use it and
I think perhaps get some benefit out of it. This is
looking at European. It's amazing actually. Yeah, it's surprising
that the crossover a particularly
in European houses with you think you know,
the father of the house is a role and master parliaments and the
number that have say the most unique the father of the house conducts
the
The speaker and the most junior members are the people who count the
votes and that's the way I'm like half a dozen of something. That's
just that commonality you brought like
that. Do you think in some ways it ties into a
message that we heard from previous submitters?
That the way to do well in Parliament
seems to be to want to become a minister and this seems
to be little incentive to become a good parliamentarian or to
be a back venture who gets institutional knowledge. Yes,
I think it is. I think
it would a little that, you know, sort of people were
having to submit to
You know an unwhipped to vote we have actually
they didn't know if even their own colleagues were the ones who are going to be voting for
them sort of the experience in the elections and the House of
Commons where you know, it's you've got a couple of government hippies and
some opposition in peace and they are all sort of get their
10-minute speech and you know Graham, I
was in Westminster when John Burke was elected.
Amazing day, you know, I listened to five speeches from five
different people who sell nominated.
As you pointed out Chris Hess long standing
back bench in peace. Never likely to
be men ministers.
Head head one of Adrian's Mr. Speaker's
colleagues decided to self-nominate against
him.
I would probably suggest in New Zealand in the New Zealand
political system. That would be political suicide. Even
if there was a secret ballot. So I like the
idea of Novel. I'm not sure you're gonna have many candidates.
No, I I have a context with a
say a national rep member nominating but
then voting would probably go
along party lines because that's the way we do it.
I think I acknowledge that in my submission. It's you know,
it's it's rare that you have even have a contested
vote, you know, the last sort of
at least three or four times. I think that the look that
you very rarely have a contested vote. Even you know,
the speaker and speaker Mallard.
We're both no contest at all and
that might happen for a while and it might be it might be a while before
it happens. You make the change now you don't notice it because you
only have one nominee but then in 20 or 30 years
time when it's suddenly matters, maybe some other thing has changed like it's
one of the ways it's not a big result. That's not
a big change. That's it. Probably wasn't a big change.
That figure change in the United Kingdom, but then
brexit happened and at that point it really
mattered that that change has been made 20 years earlier because
suddenly the speaker had I'm the person
who represents the house and had a bit more behind them
to be able to say I really am people voted
for me and you know, it was me there were
voting for not you know, there were voting as the government and just the
background so I don't think it would be a big change and it
would be a change wouldn't it might not even happen for
you know, three or four terms, but you'd have the change you
might never have about for a few terms but in suddenly
suddenly it would matter and oh, yes, you know it and
it wouldn't be a big thing. The other thing I perhaps to
talk about the processes that
you have around statutory office. So I followed quite
closely the the review during the
last term of the of the decision making 2017
and the office Talent committee. I'm not
sure I have the exact answers of what the process should
look like.
But I very much do think there should be a process
and you know, I've really ask
yourself the series of questions I put down and writing him.
What should this look like? What power should they have? What
committee should it be? You know who should
be the people who are assisting the committee and maybe you want
to legally trained select committee clerk on the
committee who will be doing something like that. Yeah, maybe you
want like sort of I had the idea of sort
of a collection of two or three things that was the 2017 and
2020 in reviews and it was watching the the hearings
of the January 6th committee and thinking, you know, all that
evidence. They got that we haven't yet seen because it
was in effectively depositions and that's not something
that just Parliament does but for that sort of inquiry particularly
where it's not a judge, but we're at someone where
it's a judge you have had the judicial conduct commissioner where someone
who's not a judge those sorts of depositions perhaps
with the people asking the questions.
You know our Council appointed, you know members will
be able to ask them themselves as they are and others, you
know, but we're sort of actually you have someone whose day
job is cross-examining someone because that's the way you get the evidence
you need out and it's something that I
think you should look at and it's something that you
know, there have been I think six referrals from
the judicial conduct commissioner. Some of them three of
them are thinking respect to one judge. It hasn't been around long. It hasn't
come here yet several of the bean have been, you know
district court or lower judges or coroners or someone like that who would
never come to this house because in a sense lucky
for you, but if it is a high court or
seeing it more senior judge, it's the
ought to be a process and I think it's better to look at
and decide have some discussions about what it should be like
now rather than waiting until it comes
up and having to have that discussion with their their lawyers
saying here's what you should do and the committee or
the house hasn't really thought about it.
Happy to take questions on that or anything else. I have
changed and thanks two things.
So one in terms of the election of the speaker. Just
going back to that. What do you say to the perspective that
actually it's important
that there's transparency and
that members of parliament are visibly accountable for
their boats. How do you differenciated in
this situation? I think that's true for almost
everything.
And I think sort of one of the but not
quite everything. I think the speaker is one one of
the surprises but then thinking about it, maybe not that surprising there have been
suggestions risk, you know over the last few years the governor general should
be voted on by Parliament and you could see why you wouldn't want that to be the case.
If you were an MP who voted against the governor general and so
there are there is at least one Parliament. I forget which one
it was who
every vote on every appointment. So most of most
of the rules in European parliaments aren't their rules for the election of speaker.
It's their rules for elections in Parliament. So
in any person they elect I don't
know if they have any abortion supervisory committees or something like that, but sometimes
even it's it's everyone about the Prime Minister, you know,
and so they are electing the prison and has a parliament.
Instead of the effectively our governor general and that too
was by secret ballot and you can see the reason and I
think that it gives an added weight
to the person who is got the job that it's
the person who the MPS really wanted.
And that's certainly the case when there's a unanimous vote,
which is that General experience, but it's I
think you have the chance of having it in 20 or
30 years time when it matters. It's the real submission.
Yeah, and that's the sick and if it's right here and
was actually in your submission. You spoke about
an opposition business day.
And or time and Parliament and
I'm not really familiar with
how that works. So it was
I think it's effectively what the United Kingdom House of Commons has
instead of members days. And I don't know if they have them as well
or something like that, but
Some number of days. I think it's 17 for the the main
opposition party and free for the second opposition party.
They the opposition just decides the order paper for that
day.
And so those were the days on which brexit books happened.
We want a direction from the House of Commons that
the Attorney General provide the information the legal
advice that he gave the government on the I think
it was the Northern Ireland backstop or something like that and it's not something the
opposition can ever get evoke on New Zealand without the agreement
of the government.
You can you know and I give the example over the last term
or so with head sort of motions on the order paper
to remove a speaker walk to remove a speaker and
that's not something that the opposition can either get
a vote on unless the government agrees and they're going
to lose the vote and that's proper. If you don't
the government says no, we're happy with the speaker but for things like
that and I'm not sure it needs to be as extensive as
in the UK because I think New Zealand likes the members and things
like that, but
Having the ability for the leader of the opposition or specified
leaders. Maybe it's one bill a year, or
maybe it's one vote a year or or whatever to say
the house needs to address this and not
having to get the agreement of everyone, you know agreement to
pass but not the agreement to have the 30 minute
or an hour long debate and devote and I don't
know what it looks like but it's something that I saw
when I was looking up something else and in the UK panels like
yeah, that makes sense. You know, why can't the opposition
decide we're gonna have a vote on this. Maybe it's
a bill maybe it's a debate on something. It's something
you could agree now, but it's something you have to agree now and sometimes it's
something the government won't want to agree to and maybe it's
instead of the general debate, you know, answer potentially by
using the the new standing orders that
allow for issue debates to
happen every Thursday, but that is
in some ways determined by the business committee the government's
approval.
It's what that debate would be and believe that the opposition to
sit down. Yes, or just yeah, or you
have that most of the time that's the business committee but
every so often the opposition says, oh that
one we're having next month. We'd like to take that over or you know,
they get one a year or two a year or whatever, you know where they
can just say actually there's an important thing we want to discuss and we
get and you get a vote on it and they lose but they
forced to vote on it and they can point to the government voted against
this and this is why you should presents so next
time it passes. Thank you for your submission. We've run
out of time and we'll yeah consider
a Keith really what you submit I
think you thank you. We now have
engaged
Okay, let's please
come forward.
Thank you for your submission. You can tell you
that members every tool submission with allocated 20
minutes.
It's up to you how you use that? You can
make it interactive or you can talk to your submission and
have questions at
the end if you like that and I
Kato
more for climate in Era for Holy
season according to see Thompson PNA we're
here on behalf of engaged to speak to us submission.
Noting that you're taking it as reading. What I'd like to do is
just outline a couple of preliminary things before we
turn to your questions. And if you do have any questions
as I'm going through the preliminate thoughts, please feel free to
interact. And the first thing I want to talk about is
the fuckaba of engage.
So as many of you will know that I own a cup of M Ori
lobbying firm based on time again Lakota called uffie. It wasn't
long after I established a fee that I
realized that the things that people needed weren't formal lobbying.
It was a better understanding of the parliamentary
system. So in other words Civics education
receiving an inquiry for our services and being
able to go back to an organization and say that
we are confident with the right tools and skills that they
are likely be able to do lobbying themselves as my
long term aspiration for the lobbying industry.
Is empowering as a professional lobbyist?
To be able to share the knowledge we've gathered.
From our work across precincts to go on and be able to enable others
to be their own best advocate.
The second matter that I want to raise with you.
Is that I don't want the committee to underestimate how much each of us
here in our various capacities take for
granted the amount that we know about this world.
In my five years in business. I've become increasingly aware.
of just how big the divide in society is
between those who know how all of this world works
and those that do not
this means that in my experience.
There are particular facets of our society such as multinationals unions
professional associations and the
like who are often on the front foot of political
engagement engagement. This is those who remain
consistently reactionary
is ever increasing divide is why I believe it is important that teaching
people about what parliamentary institutions
can do for them rather than
what people can do for these institutions is so
important.
I'm
It's almost an Unwritten Roland politics that once
you're elected to keep out of your job for the first
year is learning how this place works.
But if it takes the parliamentarian a
year to get there feet well and truly under
the desk. How nurse is someone who doesn't work here
doesn't have time or impetus to
invest your energy into learning the ins and outs of
this place and doesn't have access to those long
sitting staff who can recite
McGee off the calf how they supposed
to to learn how all of this works.
That's not to say we have to make every single
parliamentary practice understandable to the General
Public.
Instead of submission focuses on how engagement
and in particular engagement outside
of this Precinct can almost skip that
educational component and allow the
public to engage without having to learn over 160 years
of parliamentary chikunga just to
have their voices heard.
and
that they now submission took advantage of
the fact that they weren't any changes their friends and sort of had a look
at the broader picture of what engagement could look like
at a parliamentary and government level.
Turning back to the precinct. So
just wanted to acknowledge that and writing us admission and trying
to pull together a Time cost benefit analysis at.
About 54 of our sub and mixed up timings for standard
reading debates and general debate times just to
show that no, even though so called professionalsion can
get lost amongst all the rules but I
think the point still stands that we can get a much more
meaningful purposeful schedule of
time in the house particularly at recommendations.
789 that we've made
So to close I want to take members through.
One of the experiences that happens to me early on in my
lobbying career, which was after I came out of a ministerial Hawaii
with a client and those clients
remark. We got positive outcomes and the meeting, but the
clients remarks and me we couldn't have done it without you and
one of the things that I thought at that point
was that really is not appropriate. They should be able to do it
without me. So it's just in that
light that we give you our sub and we hand over to you guys
for any part time that you may have. Thank you for the opportunity. Thank you.
Any questions Jane? Yep, and you and
and thanks for your submission. And
I think like I really get your general Point.
There's in terms of the recommendations
six about the Ombudsman
providing a briefing and recommendation on whether that
I oah should be extended to Communications with
members of parliament. I'm interested
in terms of
like and I'm really open to that idea.
This is something kind of I think the green party has supported
that as a proposal. I've always had
a concern in terms
of that sometimes imbalance of power between people
who either feel vulnerable to the state or
have a funding relationship
with the state and they see their
member of the parliament is
the way that Avenue for things to be raised while
being protected and whether you've
had experience of that whether you
think that's kind of
Not such an issue or yeah, the
emphasis for this recommendation was the
things that happened at the time. So where we had
a member of parliament basically trying to
pull apart the legitimacy of
parliament itself and speak to
things that are happening in and around the official information at real
quick, you know behaviors of members of
parliament. So our reasoning for including it in the submission
was therefore to then say to the committee if there's
something that committee is concerned with then ask
the Ombudsman to then make the case for it to happen.
I don't have a view either way whether or not I think
it is a good or bad idea. I think the thing that we constantly have
to come back to is that Parliament
is there to serve the people people are not
there to Parliament. Therefore. The question is to be
asked do they have belief in the structure and if they don't and
if that's been called into question why a member that serving in
Parliament at the time then that question should be then
irrigated by that who was supposed to be
the regulatory body.
Hmm. I think the difficulty
I find with allowing. All MPS
to be oaaable is
that the government is the the people who
are making the decisions based on a lot
of information that other MPS don't have and
so in some ways I question with a
MPS who are opposition or back
bench would be less likely to actually seek out more information
of their new all of the emails we
traced and could be used against them by the
government.
I mean as I said, I don't have a view either
way. It was just where you have somebody who's one
of the 120 calling into question the legitimacy of
the institution itself. I
think that then you have an obligation to then say
back to the people.
Then this is what question we're asking to give
you confidence in the institution itself.
You submission.
Tease out the members statement components. So
you're suggested in the table on page 7 degrees submission that
possibly you would look to have a general debate which would
be extended to 10 minutes, but the 12 MPS and
then you'd also have speaking slots for
2018 Visa 90 seconds, which is a pretty short
period of time there. So I want to try and
Tease out the logic around that it's a good time frame or whether the
alternative would be to still keep it five minutes,
but you'd effectively double the number so between 24
MPS it would contribute to imagine the based on. Yeah. No
that was where I just got the maths wrong
and mixed up reading debates as being
ten minutes was General debates with drone 5. So no
changes to General debates member
statements and Minister's statements and new.
Ideas, I guess that last half an hour each and
so how many in a 30 and a half
hour slot. How many MPS would you be suggesting
would contribute to participate from the
master member statement. It depends on how long you want
to give them to make a statement if it's 90 seconds. That's 20 MPS
a minute you 30? Yeah.
I am I had a question
about the photography. Yeah impedes
and the debating chamber.
and I just wanted to understand a little
bit of where that's coming from because
The way I personally read this is that MP's
knowing that they could be photographed at
all times with simply move the conversations to the corridor outside
the building.
Why don't imagine that conversations are already happening in the
corridors, whether they're being photographed in the house or not.
So one of the reasons why we put this into the submission
was more to speak to the people who are watching
Parliament who often only see what happens on the
six o'clock news. So it was one of the things to again
try to speak to a wider range of
people who are not experiencing Parliament and
their manner within which many of us here know that
it can be which is not just an adversarial environment. It
can be one that is quite positive and one
that is quite collegial as well. So it's just
media can take
photographs in the chamber of
the subject rules in the speaker is I'm sure
we can explain can give permission to anyone to take a great for
a particular purpose.
One of the rules is that you know, you're expected
to protecting photographs of the person who's debating at
the time because obviously well
president obviously, but there's
some famous photographs of people doing and dignified
things in the house or just like not paying attention
being asleep or playing game
on your phone wouldn't they are right in you
saying that we
should hear photographs of any member at any time, you know
focusing on them, or is it just a more General? We should
anyone should be able to take a photograph of what's going on in the
house. I'm just trying to understand me coming from hey, it's
not it's not leading whoever's up in
the gallery without the phone and take photo. It's still having those
accredited photographers, but
Um relaxing that role around only being
able to photograph people who are on their feet see if
you take these Trend seen it as an example
for a long time. There was a blanket band on photography
when they're lower house allowed photographs of
any MP who was in the chamber to
retaken and there's some quite iconic photos
of message legislation
passing it everyone celebrating on the
other hand. There's also some very humanizing lots
of in peace doing some quite funny things
that make them
That they give people who aren't tuning in 24/7 to
and one or two humanizing. You
know, this my point right you remember
A minister in the Clark government who've flown
back from London event having arrived at seven
in the morning being worked to be back in the house by two o'clock and
was literally struggling to keep his eyes
open. No no focus of his.
And and the context that was never reported and
it was very unfair.
So so we get what you want to do and we're
not being defensive but there are some contextual
I think limits that need to be put around.
So we'll certainly have killed and I
can add the current rules or photographs
to be taken. It's colleagues
to see on certain occasion and quite
often and on the
reading of a treaty settlement there will be
photographers and the gallery not only taking photos
of in the gallery also people
in the gallery, which is actually against the
rules unless they have particular permission from
the speaker. That's
and just that your point about the broadcasting
of more coverage and
and listening to your submission and other some
other submitters of suggestive that like
On the Parliamentary TV when it's kind of after hours
that maybe there could be rescreening of
significant select committee meetings that have happened
listen to you. Also wondering whether you think
it would be a good idea to have kind of basic little short
educational videos on how to
engage with your Parliament that might scream at
that time because it sounds like I get what
you're saying is like this and that sense that it
takes an MPS a year to know this, okay?
way longer
like I
think a real issue. Yeah. Yeah killer I
would just speaking to that. I one of the things
that is important for me is for
the public
Our community and Society to understand that
Parliament while it has a place in being adversarial it
is not just that and one of the things that constantly
amazes me is the rhetoric that
I hear around many around all members of parliament is
how the assumption is that you are versus how
you truly are as humans. So that is
one of the reasons why I would like within reason
of course and that is
for the committee to consider if that is appropriate to
have a look at what could be
used to give further context to
what's happening in Parliament.
Right you through the questions?
Killed, I think don't really thank
you.
I will
now hear from David King.
So right
thank you for your submission. That's right.
Happy to hear.
From you that your submission and particularly time
for questions from Members. Thank you.
Sure. Thank you for the opportunity to speak to you
today. I'm going to make two points one
major and one minor but they are related. I'm
aware having worked in and
around Parliament and public sector for near
30 years that both of
my suggestions maybe deemed quite naive
but believe me, I won't sleep
at night only I have made these points. So nothing
else delivered me a good night's sleep. So
thank you for that as a
young public servant wandering around this place
you to Wellington from Christchurch.
I had a very strong sense that there were
three things that we were very complacent about
one was the risk of the
earthquakes.
One was the risk of terrorism and third
was the risk to the durability of our
democracy. How much?
We took that for granted. I'm a
historian and
My view is that from a historical
point of view democracy is still
very much an experiment.
The end result of which is not certain and
that we live now in times
where there are quite significant risks too and
democratic system. There are
I think emerging deep divides within society
and there is
a risk that we lose a sense of our common.
purpose in unity as a people and
you know my
my greatest fear is that
at least we get more examples of
civil unrest at worst democracy
proves not to be as durable as
we
thought it might be
what's that got to do with the standing orders?
committee well
I think
essentially if we value democracy.
And wanted to endure and are
concerned about risks.
We need to do everything we can.
to maintain the legitimacy of
parliament maintain people sense that
this is a place where issues are work through
in a constructive Manner and to role
model that and
in my view having observed.
Parliament from the outside this year and the
particular having followed one bill through
I lost a lot of confidence in a
democratic.
System I felt it didn't
uphold the values which
I think under the pennant in a
particular constructive.
constructive debate as opposed to there's a
debate did not take place
and
I am essentially suggesting that there's a
big issue for.
This committee to think about in terms of what are
the roles that are placed around how we
how you debate?
And do those do those
rules.
reinforce
to our society that thrive constructive ways
of working through issues or do they
accessibate for potential divides amongst
us and increase those
divides over time.
I don't have the specific answers, but I'm suggesting I think
I called it a minimum minimum standards of
Civility. I've commend to this committee
the work of Dr. David brommel. If you haven't come
across it before who's a form of public servant and
academic who's done a lot of work on.
It's how to argue in a free and open
society and the way that this constructive rather
than to visit.
So I hope you might reflect on that.
the second more particular and related point is that
I think the legitimacy of
parliament will be enhanced if there is
a strong sense among
the populace that
substant substantive questions in question
time are actually answered substantively
rather than just address. I told
you I was naive.
I I just checked this today looking at
the first five questions in the house and the
two that were and I
have no particular interest or extra grind about these particular issues, but
the two two that I played particular
attention to or I thought were good examples of
this.
Were the question to the Prime Minister
by the leader of the opposition?
about
the the entrenchment
issue and the
question to the Minister of Finance.
about
funding for Radio New Zealand
and TV and said and
the substantive issue and each was in first
was head the minister of
local government breach the cabinet.
Menu and in the second
was what was the ration of lying
behind the the unification
is that
we're all merger of Radio New Zealand and TV NZ
and I came away from
that nonetheless nonetheless and
I asked myself. What is
the purpose of this whole
performance if I as a citizen who actually,
you know things about thanks, so
and no wiser is
a result of this and I
Remember wind previous speaker made
attempts to get members to
address the substance of the substantive question that
that seemed to
me to be successful and it
made clear in a way that you don't get clarity.
Now when a minister
does not have a substantive answer to a substant
question and that speaks volumes and as important tonight.
So if I
suggestions
Can I have the first question and that was not
at all the criticism. So just the comment really because
both examples that you gave about the
questions were supplementary question, of
course to the primary questions. So I've agreed
with you on the primary question. Yeah supplementaries that
are not on notice that I think you can expect that
kind of anyone for opinion.
Yeah. Well, I would have seen this again.
Yeah, so yeah, I would have said the Prime Minister
on the issue of the day about trenchment and that
wasn't
the question. It's not the primary question the supplementary.
But yeah, I would still would hope
the Prime Minister thanks to be able to answer. So
that's a question.
Can I go back to the comments you made about the experience
you had with the passage of
the orangutanity bill and your
loss of confidence in our system. These are your
words. Yeah broken down lost a lot of confidence in our
system didn't uphold certain value.
It wasn't constructive. It felt destructed. Can
you give some specific examples of
what you observed that leads you
to that judgment?
Well, I felt through the
whole process. There was
no.
No identification that seemed
to me to have any rational basis given
for what under
in the government's decisions in
regards to that bill. And of course, it was
opposed by all and Sundry
and I came
away thinking if
this process
Does not flush out what what
is the rationale for?
a bill
particularly a bill which is heavily opposed by
large numbers of people how much
I cannot
emphasize enough across sector
because I worked with the children sector in almost
but I cannot emphasize enough the
the sense of grief and disappointment the
loss and that issue which then the
biggest thing I think kind of reinforces the point. I was
kind of make or two points was going to make well, the first one is
that this is a robust place and absolutely notice that
is a pretty extreme example of where
The dominant government party was
at odds with the other parties and Parliament and that
that was going to lead to some pre-acrimonious doing and
frying. I don't know how well, you know, Shakespeare.
Quite well, but this place is a bit like Julius Caesar.
The bed that men do lives on beyond the good is often
turd with their bar. Absolutely and and I see a lot
of good that goes on. Oh absolutely two thirds of
the legislation goes to a supported by absolutely majority of
parties if not unanimously.
Select committees by and large work. It's pretty
chilly.
And and the last thing I say, is that what you see on the six o'clock news?
It's a bit like the motor racing, you know, you
don't see them or one going around and not crashing. They
advertise the crashes to get people to
watch Formula 1.
And I feel that this place while it can be improved. Don't get
me wrong.
Um, but I think gives you a previous submitter was
saying and I know having worked
with many ministers across parties
who are all reasonable people by
and large and you know, seeing you here today
working collegially, but that is
not what the public sees and that is what is definitive in
how the public perceived this
place. Just my
last point was that you central point is that there
should be minimum standards of Civility. Yeah, and and that's been
the worry. She's not a few times. Yes.
I I'm
Skeptical no just wouldn't be
the word. I'm truly on the fence because I think ultimately we've
got to look at ourselves in the mirror where accountable to the people we
serve. Yeah, they will have final say over.
white longevity
but
I'm just open to but not convinced that sort of
a civil standard is gonna help just one
brief observation from me having thought very deeply
about many of the issues that have been raising over the you know
for 15 years that I've nearly 15 years that I've been here more
than half of which was as an opposition in being more.
Literally. I remember you as an official. Yeah, that's
right. And as well as an official before yes.
Where it hasn't Representatives not a house
of delegates. No, and I think that's something that
I that when we debate democracy, we always perhaps need
to keep in mind ultimately.
this isn't a
we here to represent people and to make judgments on their
behalf. Not necessarily to follow directly the
the feedback that we
might get from people. Yeah, because the feedback you might hear
it's a link Community process for example might be overwhelmingly opposed something
which the problem might actually support on
the other hand the public might support that might
oppose something that the government of the day is in favor
of and on balance the public continue
to have confidence of the government example the next ownership
model. Yeah. It was a referendum about this the public
didn't want us the government of the day did it anyway and they got
really? Yeah, so
there's always going to be that a little bit of attention there.
We're
we want an open Parliament. So people
can have a say or on legislation. That doesn't
necessarily mean that that Parliament is always
going to follow what the weight of
that representation might follow. Oh homosexual law
reform never would have passed. Yeah Parliament followed the weight of submissions
at the time which are opposed to it. Yeah. Yeah.
And two things so one and engaging
and what Minister Hopkins was
just saying because what I heard in your presentation was that actually
your concern wasn't about the government
not doing what submitters had asked for sure that
I found that didn't go back
but was actually in the fact
that there was no rationale provided for
why and and then
your submission you're specifically talking to the
fact that questions were asked that was
specific. Yes, and that non
we never got specific answers
in and partly want to
explore that because I get I was one of
the people asking questions and was frustrated with the answers.
And I've also said in the position of watching other people
ask questions of a minister where I'm like you're talking
past each other and this is
a problem in the framing and the question is
and lack of understanding of the issue that
they're not understanding the relevance of the ministers answer.
So how do
we how would the speaker or
cheer how would we have
been have the expertise and being able to assist that
because it feels to me it's quite embedded knowledge
to be able to make that decision. Yeah, I yeah, it's a
very good question hustling about that as as
I
came
And to be frank, I don't have the
answer, but I think there are.
You know, there are potentially particular skills that
might be thought about in terms of who the speaker
is in terms of like capacity
to identify. What
is the critical issue that's being asked in a
particular case. It doesn't have to be across every issue. But I think
the issues that are drawing the attention of
the public of the day, which you're going to
go to confidence in the system and so on the year
having that
Focus on what was the real question that's being
asked here and what would constitute?
Standard answer to it. Even if it's
perfect in every way
and I think just we actually
five minutes past the end of this and
listen, but
okay quickly. Thank you around the minimum
standards. And when other thing I think was missed in terms
of the conversation about and being elected and
the people judging us is the concept of leadership from
this place and maybe it's ago
I was involved in there week without violence. We're school
students came in and reviewed Parliament on their school
code of conduct and we question time would
be in detention pretty much every member and I've got
very strong views about that and now behave badly in the
house myself. So yeah does that
is that part of the problem for you about the lack
of modeling of good behavior? Yeah, I
think to be very very yes.
parliamentarians do represent but they
also lead and
as Minister Hopkins
said, you know, they shouldn't always support
what but even the
popular opinion is I think this is an area
where even if the public
Incredibly emotive and to some
extent irrational about some issues this
place modeling how to
have emotive.
Have good discussions about the
motives issues.
Which draw out what were the underlying issues
factors?
That are determinant in a government deciding to
do one thing or another would be such an improvement.
Thank you. We're gonna have to leave here. Thank
you very much. Now we
have Joseph Duke and
conversations fire advising
Yoda, can you hear
me? Yes, we can cure to Joseph. We've got
you for 10 minutes. We've read
your submissions. I'd like to speak to the committee were
happy to hear from you. I Kyoto.
Um, I'm just I just want to keep it really brief. And
so I'll just make some quick remarks
about men are inform Provisions, which
is just something I've been thinking about in the last
week.
And then just make some remarks on
the two substantive issues in my in my
written submission about the regulations Review Committee
and New Zealand
Bill of Rights Act section 7 reports and you
know happy to engage with
questions and with the committee's leave. I might
also um consider questions a bit
more deeply and provide some provide them in a written
format.
So yeah, I'll speak briefly about that
matter informed Provisions or more
commonly known as entrenching provisions. And yeah,
there's been a lot of a lot of public discussion recently about
them and I'm aware now
that
at least
believe the issues being referred
to this that they use should have a more substantive substantial
basis rather in the standing orders.
and this time my
you
Is that really this should be some additional procedural
steps for the house to go through before vote
on such a man? So for example,
there could be a change sustaining order 270 specifying
a higher minimum majority
such as 75% of
members or higher rather than very much
leaving that up to the Goodwill of members in
terms of the the precise number and that
would that would have the effect of making it a more
unanimous or near unanimous decision of religious.
But I also struggle with this issue on the
principle that really a parliament should
not bind a future Parliament accepting
those most fundamental constitutional
matters, but
but as I have
Really consider the matter much the and
I on that
specific issue.
and
In terms of the regulations Review Committee. I
I just want to make a number of quite minor
and Technical recommendations. So obviously
the legislation act 2019 has has
come into Force.
And so we don't really have regulations anymore. They're
all secondary legislation.
And I think that I'm parliamentary Council
will probably speak a bit
more eloquently on on this issue than than
myself but in my
written submission, I've given some examples of of different
names the committee could could consider
renaming it too and and
just also making those consequential
amendments and the rest of the standing orders.
But yeah, like I say, I'm sure PCO will make
make some more.
Indians remarks about that
And the other thing is just about
the grounds the regulations
Review Committee can bring a regulation
probably. Yes secondary legislation
to the special attention of the house
and I just think these pets could
be expanded or given more clarity and
and the Committees picked up on this many
times over the years and you know, the sunset Clauses
Henry the 8th Clauses and the
imposition of a fee Levy
and defective or
unclear Drafting and I guess
this could all come under that that Catal ground.
But there's also that the matter that would be
complainants about a regulation male may
not have access to to legal advice. And
so it might be more Sage to have
that Clarity and so people can
have a bit more understanding of what they might be
able to complain about.
In terms of Bora section
7 reports. I just want to suggest some additional procedures
to be followed in.
I guess quite rear circumstances.
So the first is that committees who
are considering a bill alongside such a report and they
should be precisely obligated to
point and independent advisor.
And so it is the prerogative committees to disagree with
the attorney's View and
but my belief is that committee's should have
such an advisor with substantial experience
working in that right space to support
them in making a really good decision. That's
really really justifies.
Um, secondly, I think there needs
to be some sort of procedure for when a
section 7 report is tabled after the first reading
of a local private or members Bill and so
over the past few years. There have been several situations where
a report is referred to
the committee after the first reading and two cases
in particular with a report has been referred after
the committee has close to missions on
that particular bill.
And so the three bills that orangutamariki
the youth Justice demerit points
Amendment bill and the holidays parent teacher
interview leave Amendment bill and the Rotorua District
Council representation Arrangements Bill.
I'm sorry, I suggest that when such a
report's table after the first reading of
of that type of Bill that the
bill actually be immediately referred
back to their house for a short
day and photon with
the two so withdraw suspend or continue
with the bill.
And and if such a report is referred after
submission.
And the house decides to continue with the
building submissions on the bill, and in terms of those three bills
two of them were ultimately withdrawn.
And thirdly I think this should
be some additional formalized procedures. So
the attorney can inform the house that
an amended Bill no longer appears to
be inconsistent with the Bill of Rights
act. So that would essentially be a formalizing the
procedure the attorney took on the
contraception sterilization and abortion safe
areas Amendment Bill and there are
a number of different ways that could that could occur ministerial statement
before the second reading or a supplement
to their section 7
report or something like that.
I finally I just want to make the rather uncontroversial submission
that the legislative procedures
for do eyes Declarations of
inconsistency should be incorporated into
the 2023 standing orders.
Well, that's me.
Thank you. Just need to take questions any questions
across you.
And thank you. Well, I
was into mines for the two. I mean just acknowledge the submission. I think it's
really excellent actually isn't a number of items for which I agree strongly.
I think certainly that mechanism you've indicated would
be helpful to enable that dialogue between
the attorney general and the house where the bill on
which the attorney had reported. The first place has changed I
think and as you know, given a particular example of that I
I think reflected good process in relation
can just make one of the comment Mr. Chair and rather
than question I suppose and in terms
of expanding these standing order 327 to
grounds for the regulations Review Committee, you've
noticed it existence of Henry the 8th
clause and you know lack of
prescription of an amount in relation
to the prescription of a fee or Levy these are matters, of
course that the committee can in does
pick up and highlight in in
the case of draft legislation that comes to
it when advising on regulation making Powers within bills
that are going to other select committees,
but just to be clear your arguing that
Be able to be the subject of a complaint or have I
missed the point. Yeah, I think both.
and just in terms of your question, I
guess it's not
just
drive off and draft form is
set. There are so many different agencies
that are empowered to
create secondary legislation and not just the core
agencies or ministers. And that's
where perhaps some of the issues tend
to tend to come about as a as I'm
sure you know
Yeah.
Yeah, I guess I guess plan
two is an explicably linked with
three to eight about the the complaints.
Those are the grounds that that people can make
complaints on.
It's helpful. Thank you. Thanks to cheer back
to you.
Thank you. Unfortunately run out of time do we?
Thank you Joseph. It's okay.
We now have the Parliamentary Council Office case
here.
And Casey
Nicholson, she's panamichi Council I have with
me Ross and Carter. What about most senior Furniture Council around now,
if you know very well and
I was gonna open with a few comments and then you take
me you want and our promise today
are sort of quite nudgy, you know
more minor but there's more sort of
pushes if you like that and all aiming
it smoothing the way to getting better
law. It's more accessible more understandable for the public
and just enabling us to use
a few more leavers in the system. And so
the first of ours we've
got three kind of made submissions and the first is really
around the tune. So you can really distillation the previous
submitted all my thunder a little and not so
revolutionary, but
You know the shift to using the terms your community station across
the statue book was a massive piece of undertaking by,
you know, supported by all parties
across the Parliament and it sort of
3,000 amendments across the statue book. It's now well,
I'm transition website with really
added put effort
into trying to make sure that it links in well to what
the next low on obligations are and for
makers that you can really distillation.
And that responds to parliament's own particularly
regulations review committees identified concern with
the many confusing categories and overlapping terminology
leaders of instruments didn't lead
tertiary legislation regulations and that
kind of conceptual confusion feels
like low-hanging fruit perhaps but
has actually has obscured understanding about what
the rules are for this category if you legislation and therefore
the transparency and the parliament's own
effect of oversight of the legislation.
So we do have this category now as you can really dislation. It's got
bright lines in the sense that Parliament gets
to see those bills as they come through the house and be
clear about which Provisions empowers you can
really distinction so that category is now much more
definitive.
And really we're recommended to the
committee that you give some thought to Rolling that change
out through the standards and getting the same Clarity there
in the rules of Parliament. And so they
mirror and support really the
legislation acts and Provisions and enable
the public to see where the
legislation it Provisions kind of teamed up if you like in The Laws
of Power
That also would
address some of the kind of conceptual challenges. If you
like in the definition of regulations at the moment, which we
could go into if you like or
really good
question
we live in this world rights language
all of its own.
How confident are you that public people who
don't live in this world understand setting religious
subordinate to primary legislation because secondary
school is a high level of school, and we
never thought of that. I figure
you're onto something right, but I'm not sure we're not
replacing one set of
Euphemisms with another so maybe
we could work together to try and
find.
even plainer English
and that's sort of review you're on the right track.
But you know what? I mean, it's like even I can't sometimes
have to translate.
I do understand the concern is that yeah, I
understanding. It's to be honest a public don't really
differentiate between next and so you can really distinction at all
understanding what your dissolution is is a challenge. We
did do quite a lot of work to land on the
term. We've worked with right we're playing language. Okay, and
to test and they did some public testing
and we worked with the regulations Review Committee to land on
that term. So we did go through that process. Maybe
the week's done and you know, there are
you know, one since regulations is more
intuitive for people but it had all
sorts of complications and that
and
Ed confusion with with the many different labels out
there already and secondary legislation was sort of kind of
landed on as that as the best term that
met all the needs and so we did work through that with regulations
Review Committee at the time.
And into this is a change that's potentially
broader than just standing orders though. Isn't is
it not? Well, the change has been rolled out across the
statute. Yeah, so it isn't legislation throughout right?
Yeah, perhaps I could also add that they
the legislation website uses that
terminology. So it's obviously a point of contact for
the public and looking at legislation but both X
and and the secondary material that's
the way it's presented there. So so we're
very conscious of that. I should we
do at least be uniform. Yeah what we do? Yeah.
And you have the questions on that
one.
and it's points where and really some
sort of more minor points just about getting a good
fit with legislation act because the legislation actually
can only go so far and reaching into standing into the rules of
Parliament and quite appropriately it needs to leave Parliament
to sort of meet it if it's like
halfway and so there's a couple of
very minor ones that we now have a new Duty and
section 83a to Pure an annual
report on list of practices and
The regulations Review Committee in 2020 recommended that
there be a procedure for that to be standard referred to
the regulations Review Committee once it's presented.
And so that they can sort of undertake oversight
of the matters and and covered by their report and
we've in total agreement on this and you know
with support we came into the committee that you look at that process.
And secondly that we've would
propose that you adopt the additional order
on the timing for the presentation of security distillation. So
the is obligation for ministers to
present so you can religious relation to the house at the timing
for their obligation and stones and additional order it.
So it'd be great to have that rolled into students.
the next two sort of Tidy Up kind of ones if
you like that and
the legislation act has Provisions in it that will
bring the current system for disclosure statements from
being an administrative system to being a legislative
one.
And that's not even Force but
when it does come into force, it would require the standing orders to
supply a definition of what a government amendment is
because it's only government amendments to build
that would require a disclosure statement. So currently a
government amendment is sop and the
legislation act doesn't Define or attempt to Define what SF is
but the hope is that
standing orders would Supply that definition so that
it kind of effectively rolls the
current administrative system into decisions.
and the last one and we're going to speak to is just to
the peps kind
of join the dots a little bit more on the regulations Review Committee jurisdiction
around
so almost all second really distinction by default is
presented or can be just Loud by the regulations Review
Committee, but there are categories for which the
rest exemptions and material that
has confidential information commission system
material or initial security implications.
So that that secretary to station doesn't under the
legislation app come to the regulations Review Committee.
But at present the standing orders just don't really recognize that
as an exception from its jurisdiction.
And we just proposing that as a tidy up
area potentially for the committee to clarify that how
it wants to deal with
those sort of that secretary legislation. It doesn't
actually come to committee and therefore can't and practice
in a practical terms really be overseen by it
in the same way.
Oh, well just on support
of that. I mean some of them some of the secondary legislation that's
exempt from presentation as exempt
because that's it involves
an undependent actor and parliament's assessment is that
that there ought not to be parliamentary involvement welfare.
So an example would be there are
statisticians definitions under the child poverty reduction
act the statistic and dependently to
maintain that Independence thighs instruments and
what what not be
Does allowable so so as Casey
said I would be kind of those statute exemptions could
probably recognized sorry just for clarity.
You've got the requirement of
presentation of Regulation.
And I understand it. There's a series of regulations which are different
reasons are presented. Then you've got the disallowance issue.
Is that exactly the
same way. Is there a group of regulations that can't be
disallowed as well? And are they
the same?
Yes, effectively that
that there are separate exemptions, but
there are somewhat so much
can't both loud and they're exempt
from just allowance either provisions on the end about that and
then there are so much and not to take not
to play presented.
Yeah, so I mean there there is a dental plate between
those and and breaks for very committee. When it looked
at the secondary legislation Bell and the exemptions that were proposed. They're
discuss the principles around here exactly how
we do it was quite detailed with yeah. So as
you'll be aware the this there was a lot right across
the statute and those are pretty exceptional as Casey
said but govern that they're a cases where
the viewers wow that shouldn't be presented
because they contains of information or they
shouldn't be just lab or to maintain and dependence at
same as our dish just standing
order Less on the face of them seem to contemplate people
could make compliance or they could be routine scrutiny
about this side. I mean,
we're thinking very much a meadow of looking at age of the functions
of the super usually regulation isn't presented
but Kim still there
are regulations that aren't proceeded that can still be to sell out.
There are certainly time limited presentation.
and
exempt
ions takeovers notices for example that you okay?
Yeah, so and but we could certainly
if the committee was interested in pursuing this we could certain work
with about substance. You know, I think I get it right. I just want
to make sure that we're not by accident limiter. No, you
know, we're completely understand that the regular
committee is as pinks noted,
you know, we'll look at her powers and bells to
determine whether they're
Whether they involved secretary legislation or not and
so by definition after about a lock-up hours that
are not secondary legislation powers to to determine
whether they are that so it's very much better looking at
age function and and considering what's
appropriate there. But there is a sort of
mismatch which I think it would be good to address that
that's how submission
there's one other element which has the Royal
prerogative instruments, which I mean
when those standard committee looked at this. Oh, sorry when they fell
for the legislation it went
through.
That the focus was on delegated legislation,
but the definition understanding what
it says art and clothes.
Secondary legislation between close the prerogative stuff which
is not delegated. So so there is some conceptual sort
of tension or difficulty there which would
be good for resolve. And this also flows through into
the standing orders grounds. Most of which
contemplate that secondary legislation is made under an enactment
and some of the royal prerogative stuff is
by definition made under the Royal prerogative. So it's not
made under internet. So that would be
good to address this technical assistance and clarify this
for four years of the standing orders including
members of the public who make compliance.
It's not the Christians on I was
once otherwise I'll move to the first.
Sorry, no continue. I'll have a question. Sure. Sorry,
and the last point
we really want to make was about just minimizing which
of stewardship barriers for local legislation. So all
legislation needs updating and
tidying that from time to time and it's had
to get that sort of low-hanging. You
know that sort of.
small fruits maybe kind of achieved particularly
in the context where local legislation we're only
a local Authority can promote a local act
and really councils and likely to prioritize local
bills for merely tidy up kind of legislation and
we have clean up legislation every
now and again that statutes appeals bills that go through and clear
things out and we can't
use it to appeal local ads, but the
reality is that sometimes at the moment,
but the reality is it quite often local acts have been chipped away
it indirectly by public exit just take you
know, affect the statute looking various ways and they become
more out of date and
if the purpose of our government bill is just to
appeal spent legislation or or make
Amendments of that kind.
We were just recommended that you consider that that could be used
to appeal and deal with big local literation and
just again to use effectively a cleanup vehicle
for the same purpose.
I just had a bit of
Question about the defining the
government Amendment. Yeah, the disability station
and my understanding is that all Sops
are under members now because you're in
community of the whole house rather than the government and the
government Sops. We
entered The Minister's name. Yeah, and then other table and other amendments
from opposition will be under member's name.
So this would only apply to the ministers amendments in
The Minister's name.
The part for the disguiser of the legislature rather
is about disclosure statements and respective government initiated
legislation and the requirement
for the disclosure statement applies. Any
if it's practicable to produce a disclosure
statement on the amendment which and practical terms
will remain that the amendment has to be available sufficiently early
to allow that to happen. So when
the list I think it's particular care was
taken to allow the definition to be understanding orders,
but when we're making as a big God that
we're available at the time that comes into
Force which will pay 2026 or early
I buy order. So when we're conscious that our
colleagues and the clients officer aware of that and will be
for the treasury is involved and they and the commitment of
part for that same appropriate to mention that
for those communities consideration.
hmm, very interesting
the final question
I will thank you very much for your submission. Just
we now have Thomas going.
Very much.
It's almost thank you for your
submission members have read your
submission. If you'd like to speak to it
and members will hear questions. Well,
thank you very much. And thanks very much to all
members of committee for their time this evening. I'll just
start by getting a brief overview of the submission.
And then we can leave as much time as possible for questions and
discussion from their submission deals with
standing orders pertaining to the election
of a speaker and only to
those so it's a nice short sweet submission.
The first thing we have to deal with this obviously why is
do we need to look at this is this a contentious issue and the case
I opposes. Yes, absolutely and recent times
we have had issues where opposition
parties have seen the speaker to be a figure
or some level of controversy. And I and that has happened several
terms. Not just the one that has passed now.
Our members have been for a while. We'll remember other instance where
speakers have made decisions that have been controversial for whatever reason members
of the opposition have been unhappy with the
speaker.
And have sought to remove them or I've
sought to issue about no confidence and the speaker
and because the nature of the election process those have
not been possible. The current
system is by default political one de facto.
That's how it is. It's not how it is on paper,
but by nature of our parliamentary system here in New Zealand
government.
Appointments are often synonymous with
parliamentary appointments the majority
of parliament feds for something that is government usually and
so you tend to
be the case that the speaker is either unanimous appointment
or one made solely by government as has
been recent times. There's a few options to deal with this.
Problem with this issue and I'll
be really curious to hear members views on some
of those Solutions option one
that I've put forward is requiring a two thirds
support. So two thirds that has to support the speaker.
Which in my mind is the best possible solution, it
means that the speaker can confidently sit there and say that they have the support
of an overwhelming majority of members across the house not only
government members. That means that the house can sit
there and say yes, we've got two thirds of us that are backing the
speaker. It makes it very much a parliamentary decision
rather than a government decision. It makes that distinction very
clear to the public.
Option two and this one is the more at their
option. I don't think it's got much weight to it is the requirement
for opposition support. Are you in order for a
speaker to be elected the prime minister in the leader of the house would be required
to support that it's simply
doesn't doesn't really add up that one there particular
to an M&P environment where you often have minor parties comprising a
large portion of the house that means that part is such as
act to party New Zealand first you name
it. They they get taken as the equation there an
option three, of course be the requirement for and Anonymous
vote currently you can
go through hand so you can see who has voted for which candidates
and this is the best here where I'd be really curious to see what
members think of this option would it be useful would
it be helpful for standing orders to
require the vote for this big trip to be anonymous? So that
members of the public and Party Works are unable to
see who has voted for who you seem to get a number. I'll be
really interested to see what that
At what members think of that proposal?
The current system is as I said
quite political you can have situations where government
supports one kinds of speaker. The
rest of the house doesn't but they get through anyway that leads
to a situation where you have one side of the house tip John
happy with the speaker the other side of the house. I've evidently
quite happy with 13, you get a lot
of political discussion around the speaker which is of course dangerous and
at jeopardizes the nation's faith and the speaker
to be a political and their role.
I hope that submission.
Is fairly straightforward and makes a fair amount of sense happy to
discuss and to take questions from here.
Thank you Mr. Speaker. Thank you Thomas for your submission
and to what extent would you think that these
three options should transfer to
the election of other presiding officers.
So this is focus purely on.
best speaker and we heard from submitter today
that
says that you know sitting in Australia the approach whatever
it might be is suddenly applied to the the deputy speaker,
but not to what we would call or turn out assistance speakers.
So to what extent would you suggest that these
options are transferable to other presiding offices?
I think other case the deputy speaker will make sense the deputy
speaker often presides for
the long periods of time and as often
an equally quite a quite a public role comparable
to the speaker.
For example, our current speaker was
often seen in areas of
parliament back when he was the deputy speaker was often
seen quite publicly in that role because the amount
of time he spent in that position there were definitely occasions
where things would get used in the house. They would appear in the evening news
and suddenly you've got the deputy speaker in the Limelight and just
procedurally was what makes sense as well doesn't make sense to have a
different system for the deputy speaker supposed to the speaker
and the same I'd say for assistance because too
you've you've always talked yourself out of option too
requirement proposition support,
but I just point out that under immp
as far as my brief searches.
Neighbor and National have never between them reached.
two-thirds support 80 members
Probably this is the only Parliament where
that's where that's occur.
So you would automatically have
to have the support of the leader of
the opposition in order to get your option one through you
know what I mean? Absolutely. So so
trying to get the Prime Minister and leader of
their opposition to agree on the nominees isn't
probably as far as stretch as you think hmm. That's
it as well over Talking Stick. We
did have an earlier submission round Anonymous. There's
been a few secret ballot suggestions for
speaker, which I'm particularly open to but I'm
not quite sure it's going to change things materially the
very really contested.
prevailing majority parties nominator
preferred speaker and challenge or no
challenge
It was pretty generally gets you know, what he
gets there in the end. There's only
been one contest in my time. Absolutely. It's that's
the sort of thing way you leave it there in case of exceptional circumstances
MMP is
past proven to be a relatively volatile system
at times and it's the case
of you don't want to ruin anything in or out I absolutely appreciate the
points around whether or not the anonymous Verge would make any difference
but I do highlight some recent times
the hands being contention around this big issue and
that's not just over the last time that's of a couple
of times. There's been contention around the speakership and
the current system has left very little option in
dealing with that I do.
Absolutely accepts that elections as big as have been generally uncontested
and that is a really great thing for
our democracy. That means that people have faith that actually all the
parliament's getting banned one person, but
We've had times recently where it's improved to be a bit challenging and
where there's been a lot of political conversation around speakership. And
this is potentially one
way of resolving that so I should clarify the
point of making the start and Arabian P. There hasn't
been time when labor and National haven't exceeded as
Heaven exceeded the 80 vote threshold. Yeah, except
for 2002. But if you add Jim Anderson's party
and they got to 81. Yeah. Yeah, so so effectively
the leader of the oppositions
Sanction is required to get to the 2:30 pressure 10.
Thanks, and maybe I
didn't read your submission and enough detail, but the because
what I'm hearing from you there is
almost a suggestion that if there's a vote
of no confidence.
That that be put to potentially a secret
value.
Is that what because I think that's that's very
different to what's written in the submission
of quite right that's an idea and it's
I wouldn't necessarily say it's a bad idea but it's
not what's written in here. What's written in
here is that the speaker would require would either be
elected by the case of option three secret ballot. Yeah, because
I'm exploring that because the the speakers that
you referred to weren't controversial when
they were elected right and that's that's debatable point.
But yes, they want to contestants when they were related, right?
That's
but of course literally potentially work and
and the question then becomes okay were they
were they not contested because there was
an understanding that there isn't a point in contesting it
because you know that they've got the numbers and you know, that's going to be the case. So
why would you cause a fuss about it? When actually you don't need to anyone when
there's not cause for it?
Particularly, if you if you want to put it to an anonymous vote
and take the partisan tropical things
with theoretically do so. Would you have more MPS
across the house consider putting their name in the hands?
Any further questions?
Thank you very much for your submission. Thank you very much for
your time.
studies
members the next supporter is
now no longer available. So
It's kind of painted right you.
it's a completion of hearing and our